# Android Development, Fall 2018
Aim of this file is to serve as a blog in lieu of Wiki pages. Such a note-keeping ended up necessary due to my experience
with the course leaving me with strong opinions, as my opinions often are.

### Modern Development Paradigms
Turns out, programmers don't code anymore. This may sound silly (it partially is) but look at it this way: Half the code
present in this repo is automatically generated by IDE, and that's only portion of _visible_ code. Invisible code, ie. the 
one that works in the background, is a pill to swallow. At this point, production environments are more _framework_ than
**language**. Truly, what separates Android projects from Java projects? Not much, or maybe everything: on the surface,
code is of Java language with some... _tools_ working in the background.

And such a magnificent work they do! They manage screens, place objects, manage objects... All is automatic, all is hidden.
At that point can I say that I coded these projects? But of course I'm aware that my ancient sensibilities would never allow
today's products, and as someone who owns a smartphone and uses mobile apps on it, I prefer not to complain too much.

### Android Experience
This has been a blast. Really easy to use tools all around, including the language and the IDE (Android Studio). Let me quickly
note a couple of points of potential improvement and go on telling why I had fun in this course:
* Android Studio's case-sensitivity is a mess. Typing ```string``` will cause IntelliSense to look at you in confusion.
Sometimes not a problem, more often than not frustrating.
* Android documentation... leaves much to be desired. Though -as expected- all functions are there to be found, point of their
existence eludes the reader. Python documentation, which is voluntarily created, is much better to name one.

### Course Content

We have seen a number of interesting concepts. Lecture notes will not be kept on the repo due to intellectual property issues
but they deal with
* Activities: what you see on your device screen is an activity. When you tap a button and it _goes_ to another screen, that's
another activity. Essentially, we can think of activities as _views_ . Since there's no escaping a graphical element in mobile
apps, connection of user interaction elements and background function is fairly basic. Again, this may just be Android Studio's
functionalities, but there is great visual layout management tools so that a UX designer can do their work without minimal coding,
if any.
* Recycler View: judging by the emphasis placed on this feature of mobile development, I conclude that this is one **heavily**
utilized tool. For good reason too, I concur. Of course it all comes down to what your app is trying to achieve, but most apps
are run on phones, which implies narrow and tall screens, contrary to what monitor technologies try to achieve. Therefore a developer
aims to have lots of tiny wide-short screens stacked on top of each other, and further that they act as if they are on a conveyor
belt at user's whim. All in all, mobile development can said to be heavily limited by device configurations and vertical listing is
a way to get around this as much as possible.
* There was basically a 2-week intermission from mobile development to HTTP requests, API interactions and JSON parsing which was
appreciated. The important part of this section, in my opinion, was the acknowledgement that modern phones _are_ powerhouses. Jokes
on how space rockets had about the same processing power as our phones do make sense when you realize you nonchalantly manage
multithreaded operations. Android doesn't want you to connect to internet on the user view, or even do anything time consuming.
Instead you create and destroy background thread operations as needed. Therefore, they suggest, do your JSON parsing and database
access and whatnot in the background.
* Then came a quick look at menu management and how preferences are preserved. Note that, actually, menus are activities on their own
right, therefore global (ie. app scale) of perseverance is vital. Truth be told, this part is a bit hazy, need to revisit if I am
to do any serious Android development in the future.
* Another week on Android's UX principles, and how they strive to reach a unified sense of _Android'ness_ . Very interesting stuff,
though more directed towards UI/UX designers than software designers. Still, a quick look at [Material Design](https://material.io/)
is recommended for everyone involved in Android development.
* Finally -currently- we're dealing with data management. Again, there is sort of a trade off going on: Do you want your data stored
elsewhere, to be reached via internet, or do you want them locally stored eating up resources? Circumstances dictate storage is easier
to come by than internet access, thus mobile apps do offer database management tools. There is one device-wide _Content Provider_ that
manages app-wide databases. In other words, you develop **both** your app and its database, but their connection happens via this
_Content Provider_ . There's also talk of URI's and so forth, but this is as expected.
